---
date: 2015-04-21
title: "Proposal: Remote Online Voting"
categories:
  - essay
---
The following was a paper that written as a student during my undergrad studies. I decided to publish it here for others to discover, and perhaps learn from my own studies.

---

The United States currently has, for most of the populous, an in-person voting system when elections are run. With over two centuries of people heading to the polling place for national elections, a recent troubling trend has started to emerge. While the population of the United States has risen tremendously since the nation was founded and established, the percentage of registered voters actually going out to vote in governmental elections is dropping every passing election. Only 36.4 percent of eligible voters voted in the 2014 Midterm Elections head last year, the lowest turnout rate since World War II (DelReal, 2014). Even if the United States was founded on the principles of having representation in government for all, the dropping low voter turnout in these elections causes the United States’ Government to be selected by a shrinking subset of the nation that does go out to the polls.

# The Issue of Underrepresentation

But why is an increasing number of voters not going out to vote? For the most part, the effort to get registered, the need to take time off from work and school, waiting to actually vote while at polling places (or the lack of nearby polling places), and other impediments deter people from making the effort to go cast a ballot, even if they wanted to originally (Zen College Life, n.d.). In the 2010 Midterm Elections, the turnout of voters in the age group of 18 to 24 was only 21 percent (The Economist, 2014). This statistic brings up worrying revelations on the youth vote, and they might become discouraged to head to the polls in future elections due to the fact they never have gone before. There is a need to make voting more accessible to everyone. Without a representative government, citizens will find their content for it wavering, a troubling thought for what’s yet to come.

The United States’ Government should make every effort in order to boost voter turnout, as citizens are directly affected by their actions. Every citizen contributes to the nation directly or indirectly, such as by paying federal taxes or being affected by national policies. With the proliferation and prevalence of technology and the internet in people’s lives, there happens to be a better way for people to go vote. According to Dunlop (2008), a leader at the Center for Popular Democracy, “Online voting is an efficient process that encourages citizens with physical impediments to participate at their convenience. For the more mobile youth population as well as overseas voters, online voting would be even more beneficial by eliminating the need for an absentee ballot.” Remote, online voting without the need to appear in-person to polling places will allow a greater percentage of voters to turn out and vote. Michael Alvarez and Thad Hall (2003), authors of the book Point, Click & Vote, state “It seems to us inevitable: Internet voting is the future of voting in the United States” (p. 27). As voters vote from the comfort of their own computers and mobile devices, hopefully voting turnout will rise, from its lowest levels in over 70 years, and allow elections to be more representative of the nation as a whole.

# Feasibility of Remote Online Voting

The first experiments in remote internet voting started with the president of the United States. In December 1999, right at the start of the 2000 election season, former president Bill Clinton commissioned a study to analyze the feasibility of Americans voting online (Alvarez & Hall, 2003, p. 22). Conducted by the Internet Policy Institute in the following months, the study found that internet voting at poll sites could be cycled in within the next few elections, but remote online voting via the internet was inconclusive and needed more study. At that time, more research was needed on the new interconnected internet frontier and its possible applications to national elections.

But later that year, in the 2000 Arizona presidential primaries, the first example of remote online voting occurred. Voters were able to cast their vote online in the Democratic presidential primary for the first time, in a move to increase turnout in Arizona. Eligible voters were sent unique PIN numbers that they would then enter online to confirm that it was truly them voting, and then pick a candidate. Out of 86,907 counted votes, 35,768 of people that casted ballots did so online. In the end, 41.6 percent of votes casted their vote over the internet. This move online increased the overall voter turnout from 12 thousand in the 1996 presidential primary in Arizona, an increase of over 700 percent (Alvarez & Hall, 2003, p. 129). With almost half of people choosing to vote online, even for the first time it was made available, such tremendous results show the need for remote online voting. Such a precedent in Arizona can only hint at the possible increase that can be done to voter turnout across the nation as a whole.

According to Dr. Alvarez (2003), a professor at Caltech’s department of Political Science, “[even] more [young] Americans have an Internet connection than older Americans … [and] there is evidence that the difference is shrinking” (p. 52). The youth are the least likely to vote out of all age groups, and internet voting can combat that by bringing the vote right to their hands, and as the older Americans adopt technology, there will be another route for them to take advantage of. Reported in the U.S. Census Bureau’s Computer and Internet Use in the United States: 2013, 83.8 percent of households own a computer, and 74.4 percent of households use the internet (File & Ryan, 2014). A majority of Americans today have access to the internet and a computer in their daily lives, and each one of those computers have the potential to be their own personal voting site. Additionally, online voting allows citizens to vote when they are away from their designated polling location. As reported by Caltech and MIT’s joint Voting Technology Project, “Internet voting does hold immediate promise for lowering the obstacles experienced by some voters” (p. 16). People such as those who serve in the military overseas, ones with disabilities that limit their mobility, students away from home and people who travel regularly would now be able to vote without having to return to their designated voting site that could be hundreds of miles away, encouraging traditionally underrepresented sects of the public to go vote now that they would have the chance to.

# Criticism

A major reason used versus remote online voting is the potential vulnerabilities and attacks that can be mounted on it. In Elizabeth Weise’s USA Today article entitled Internet voting 'not ready for prime time', she debated “When voting is moved online, the number [who] … would want to subvert elections increases exponentially” (2014). But with the public usage of online banking systems, online government websites and services, and ecommerce transactions totaling $304.9 billion in 2014 (U.S. Census Bureau News, 2015) on our computers and mobile devices only on the rise, Weise ignores the tremendous amount of faith we already place on the internet to handle our sensitive everyday tasks. The only next tangible step we can take for elections is bringing the vote online, joining the rest of the growing services the government provides over the internet.

Opponents of remote online voting often quote the unreliability of electronic voting, but traditional means of voting are no less free of error. Paper ballots used on Election Day have led to issues such as those in the 2000 election, where in Palm Beach, Florida, votes for Democrat Al Gore instead mistakenly went to Reform party’s Pat Buchanan, due to voters getting confused by the butterfly paper ballot they had to use. Voters had to “punch out” holes in their ballots but did not happen to do completely, leaving the holes “hanging” to the ballot card (Streb, 2008, p. 77). This mishap eventually led to the high-profile Florida presidential election recounts of 2000, leaving the winner of the election in the air for over thirty-seven days (Alvarez & Hall, 2003, p. 2). While online voting may and probably will face resistance and snags when it gets utilized, no form of voting will ever be perfect.

Another issue facing remote online voting is how to deal with remote voter identification and authorization. Although verification sound like as a major hurdle and potential reason to stop online voting altogether, the exact opposite happens is true. The system is already in place. According to a study conducted by the U.S. Election Assistance Commission (2013), around 20 percent of people across the nation who voted in the last 2012 Presidential Elections did so via mail or absentee ballot, which need preauthorization to use. Only 56 percent actually voted in-person. For example, states such as Oregon and Washington use a universal vote-by-mail system and do not have polling places on election days, which requires voter verification to be done before they vote (Alvarez & Hall, 2003, p. 102), as done in the 2000 Arizona Democratic presidential primary mentioned above. These same types of identity checks and unique one-time PIN codes can be extended to remote online voting. Absentee voting and vote-by-mail currently have voter authorization protocols already in place, and these methods additionally reduces the governmental costs of holding elections as there is less need for physical polling places (Alvarez & Hall, 2003, p. 122), which can extend to online voting as well.

Some critics of online voting argue that it is a citizen’s civic duty to go out and vote on Election Day, and voting online is unpatriotic. While it’s true that Americans have been going to the polls for over two hundred years, it’s an old-fashioned view of the democratic process. The evolution of our reliance on the internet has shifted the tone and public perception of using technology to help us in everyday tasks. Strep (2008), a professor at Northern Illinois University’s Department of Political Science, wrote “I sympathize with the view of protecting the sanctity of Election Day, but with the increase in … absentee voting and early voting, we are already headed from the concept of ‘one election day’. Internet voting, then, only seems to be a logical next step” (p. 90). It should be the next step. Voting online is equally as patriotic as waiting in line to vote, and even greater if one would not have went out to vote at the polls in the first place as what happens now.

In recap, remote internet voting is a foreign concept for most of the United States. But with all the services on the internet we already take advantage of fully, from filing federal taxes to purchasing airfare, remote online voting should be one of them. Trials and precedents that have been conducted in the past show the substantial benefits that online voting can bring to the government, nation, and people. This proposal will face hardship, but a majority of Americans today have access to a computer and the internet and each and every one of them should have the possibility to vote online with the help of technology. The United States was founded on the principles of having a representative government for all, and online voting has the possibility of reversing the dropping voter turnout this nation faces today.

---

## References
- Alvarez, M. R., & Hall, T. E. (2003). Point, Click, and Vote: The Future of Internet Voting. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press.
- California Institute of Technology, & Massachusetts Institute of Technology. (2001). Voting - What Is, What Could Be. Retrieved from http://www.vote.caltech.edu/sites/default/files/voting_what_is_what_could_be.pdf
- DelReal, J. A. (2014, November 10). Voter turnout in 2014 was the lowest since WWII. The Washington Post.
- Dunlop, T. (2008). Online Voting: Reducing Voter Impediments. Policy Studies Journal, 685-686.
- File, T., & Ryan, C. (2014). Computer and Internet Use in the United States: 2013. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Census Bureau.
- Streb, M. J. (2008). Rethinking American Electoral Democracy. New York: Routledge.
- The Economist. (2014, October 29). Why young people don’t vote. The Economist.
- U.S. Census Bureau News. (2015). Quarterly Retail E-commerce Sales. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Commerce. Retrieved from https://www.census.gov/retail/mrts/www/data/pdf/ec_current.pdf
- U.S. Election Assistance Commission. (2013). The 2012 Election Administration and Voting Survey. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Election Assistance Commission.
- Weise, E. (2014, November 3). Internet voting 'not ready for prime time'. USA Today. Retrieved from http://www.usatoday.com/story/tech/2014/11/02/internet-voting-not-secure/18269285/
- Zen College Life. (n.d.). The 7 Reasons Most Americans Don’t Vote. Retrieved from Zen College Life: http://www.zencollegelife.com/the-7-reasons-most-americans-dont-vote/
