---
date: 2015-07-29
title: "Álvaro Siza, Architect"
categories:
  - essay
  - architecture
---
The following was a paper that written as a student during my undergrad studies. I decided to publish it here for others to discover, and perhaps learn from my own studies.

---

# Introduction

Álvaro Siza is a Portuguese architect well known for his semi-Modernistic and contemporary style. From first gaining fame from the Marés ocean swimming pool he started to design in 1959, Siza has since then constructed museums in South Korea to homes in the European countryside. His projects are able to showcase his simplistic and focused ability to use light, use straight and curved lines, and take advantage of the natural landscape. Siza is well renowned for his design because of his ability of blending modernistic and traditional tastes, encasing emotion into physical space and connecting the outdoor world indoors. The purpose of this paper is to look into Álvaro Siza himself, and how Siza has blended modernistic and traditional tastes, encased emotion into physical space, and connected the outdoor world indoors in the works and projects he has accomplished in his lifetime.

His projects personally intrigue me, on how such contrast of man-made constructions can combine with natures’ environment to create a balance of beauty between the two otherwise differing principles. This contrast can be seen in Siza’s Marés ocean swimming pool. With the natural color of concrete blending into the ocean rock and beach sand nearby like camouflage, Siza was able to seamlessly unite the saltwater swimming pool into the coastline. When viewed from far away, it was if the pool was a natural wonder that Mother Nature created herself, even when staying true to architectural form.

Álvaro Siza’s ability to differ and contrast, while staying timeless since starting in the 1960s is one of the many reasons I decided to look into his background and projects. His buildings are a blend of tradition and modernism, even when both seem mutually exclusive. As quoted from Carlos Castanheira, an architect who worked closely with Siza, “These works will remain recent even when Siza comes to be one hundred years old… Such is timeless architecture. Such should be the architecture of our times.”<sup>1</sup> Álvaro Siza’s ability to stay timeless even when he took up the profession of architecture over half a century ago and nearing his eighties proves Siza’s workmanship and resilience in his trade.

> These works will remain recent even when Siza comes to be one hundred years old… Such is timeless architecture. Such should be the architecture of our times.

But before diving headfirst into Álvaro Siza and his style and skillset, we first need to dive into where his design principles originate from, which will be done by looking at the history of modernist and contemporary architecture and exploring their own origins. And after that, we will look into Álvaro Siza himself by looking into his background, his upbringing on architecture, and his design principles. And finally, with Siza’s numerous collaborations and works, I will look into how he embraced some principles of modernism while looking at his own contemporary and traditional influences by going over and discussing some selected works and projects of his.  

# Modernist Architecture

What is Modernism? Modernism, also known as the modern movement, is known as the design movement that created a new standard based on the technological advances of the twentieth century onward, and moved away from those principles established and used before as of tradition.<sup>2</sup> It is for this exact movement that led to the rise of contemporary building components and mass-produced materials and allowed experimentation with building designs and processes. This era of transition resulted in the creation of a new set of standards architects would follow and build off of.

One major result of Modernism was the establishment of International Style, which materialized around the beginning of the 1930s. International Style was the compilation of aesthetics that were common across the modern movements that were occurring around the globe.<sup>3</sup> A major reason International Style was able to garner such attention in the architecture world was because architects that followed it were looking to break free of tradition and the ornamentation and inspiration from historical styles. Modernism and the International Style reached their peaks by the half of the twentieth century, and were realized in a wide variety of architecture around the globe.

There are many famous places influenced by Modernism that are in use today.  Some famous places are the United Nations Headquarters located in Midtown Manhattan of New York City and the Digital Beijing Building used in the 2008 Summer Olympic Games that were held in China. The United Nations Headquarters was completed in 1952 and follows the International Style aesthetics with a rectangular shape and glass windows from top to bottom.<sup>4</sup> The United Nations Headquarters is a prime example of the acceptance of the Modernist movement in professional circles and its help in cementing the practicality of these principles versus more old-fashioned practices. More recently, the Digital Beijing Building, used to house a data center for the Olympics, symbolizes a circuit board with its diagonal lines and a barcode with its building placement.<sup>5</sup> These famous places and others like them show the ability for architecture to diverge from historical contexts and instead opt for a more modernist and symbolic design. Such buildings prove the test of time of the modernist movement, as they continued to be used into the future.

But Modernism did not come without its criticisms. Even in the 1980’s modernism was considered to be on its way out, according to former *New York Times* columnist Paul Goldberger. In his column “Architecture View”, he states “Modernism in its various forms will never again, at least in our time, hold sway over the creative impulses of the age as it did for the first six decades of this century.”<sup>6</sup> While modernists tried to break free of the past and its architectural styles, they happened to alienate architects that tried to incorporate a balance between what was modern and what was naturally organic. Some modernists followed trends like a cult, and policed others to not stray too far from that path. Additionally, some spectators consider Modernistic architecture “elitist” and more frankly, “ugly” and displeasing to the eye. These criticism led designers to forge new paths in the pursuit of a more human and accessible way to design.

While Siza uses some aspects of Modernist architecture in his projects, he personally does not identify as part of it. Siza did not consider himself a true modernist, and sometimes called that particular style of architecture overly futuristic and emotionless for the needs of a place.<sup>7</sup> Today, Modernist architecture no longer leads design trends, and people have moved on to more contemporary design principles. I believe the innate beauty of Siza’s works comes from the distinct disparity between the earthly landscape and the constructed horizontal and vertical lines of modernism. Modernism in itself may seem industrial at times, cold and towering over, but Siza overpowers that obstacle by adopting more contemporary principles.

# Contemporary Architecture

Siza appreciates timeless design, while the Modernist architecture he studied did not always try to cater to. After speaking to an admirer of his works when traveling Lisbon in 1992, he reflected on the exchange. “Should a 1958 restaurant, being run in 1992, show that it was designed in 1958?” he wrote.<sup>8</sup> Modernism never completely fit Siza well for his style, but a blend of contemporary architecture and architectural tradition did. Contemporary architecture is defined as “everyday construction [that] uses methods that are conventional in their time and place.” Additionally, “it is the opposite of the Modern architects’ ideal of a universal construction system that follows the mandates of modern technology and therefore produces buildings that look the same throughout the world.”<sup>9</sup> It is for this reason contemporary architecture has appeared to be the most preferred for most recently constructed structures.

After looking at Siza’s recent projects, his formal style falls more in line with contemporary architecture than modernist architecture. Siza deems the latter excessive, and preferred to create architecture that was more grounded in reality. But he also understood the reasons to break with the past and design groundbreaking, emotionally inspiring buildings. For this reason, Siza has been able to design contemporary architecture that is exceptional but as well as approachable.

One renowned contemporary architect Siza admired was Frank Lloyd Wright. Siza praised Wright’s ability to look beyond just building places and instead connect every element inside and out together with nature. For example, Wright was liberal in using glass in his designs, even when such amounts were rare in his day, as glass allowed bringing the outdoor views inside. As mentioned by Siza in 1992, “[Frank Lloyd Wright’s] relationship between all the elements of the construction … mutually generate and influence each other.” This admiration of connection between the environment and structure resulted in Siza’s efforts to incorporate the environment into his projects, which Frank Lloyd Wright was famed for doing.<sup>10</sup> And with looking into Frank Lloyd Wright, we can now look into Álvaro Siza’s own background, his upbringing on architecture, and his design principles.  

# Álvaro Siza

At the time Álvaro Siza, full name Álvaro Joaquim de Meio Siza Vieira, was born on June 25, 1933 in Matosinhos, Portugal, both modernist and contemporary movements were in full swing in the architecture worlds. As Siza grew up the movements did also, since architects that led these movements from the start started to become professors and some gained fame. From 1949 to 1955, Siza studied at the University of Porto in the School of Architecture, which was adopting these new principles. Right after Siza graduated, he started his own solo private practice in the city of Porto, and practiced both types of architectural design.<sup>11</sup> With a blend of cultures from the past centuries of history, from Roman to Celtic to Islamic, Portugal happens to be diverse in its range of architecture. But Portugal recently had to face progress democratically, cumulating in what was called the Carnation Revolution in April of 1974.<sup>12</sup> Siza states the time period leading up to the revolution had formed a gap in the local design community.<sup>13</sup> It is important to note that this gap led architects to create a new identity for the future of Portugal. And so, many designers including Siza readily adopted modernist and contemporary principles as their primary identity, and have been defining them ever since.

But at first, Álvaro Siza was not at all interested in pursuing architecture as a lifelong career. When Siza was still a child living with his parents in the town of Matosinhos, he thought he wanted to be an opera singer when he grew up. His father adored opera, and Siza acquired that trait from him. But as Siza grew older he pursued other hobbies in the area of fine arts, such as sculpting, painting, and drawing. When it was time for Siza to enroll in the University of Porto in 1949, his parents elaborated to find a more feasible profession to study. This could be due to the fact that such professions Siza enjoyed did not bring in enough wages to live off of. And on his parents’ advice, Siza decided to enter the School of Architecture. Considering Siza’s artist skillset, one can conclude that those skills he learnt at an early age fortunately helped him successfully succeed later in the field of architecture. Siza was never groomed to become an architect from a young age, and he did not know as a child he would become an architect, but his own personal interests and hobbies allowed his later study of architecture to blossom. Simply put, Siza may have only discovered his ability to architect only by accident.<sup>14</sup>

It was during his study at the University of Porto that Álvaro Siza met Fernando Távora. A teacher, mentor and later collaborator, Fernando Távora influenced the principles that Siza would later cement in his works. Távora was a modernist, and was known for his aspiration to bring the Modernist system into balance with traditional design elements. Siza became Távora’s assistant at his studio from 1955 to 1958, collaborating with him on important works such as the swimming pool at Quinta da Conceição and the Boa Nova Tea House, which the latter is discussed about later in this paper. As he reportedly said “I can say that in carrying out my first works, my main concern was to ‘include’ Távora’s teaching in the project. Some of his architecture … had a great impact on me.” Additionally, Siza was worried about not incorporating enough of Távora’s style, and studied the modernist details he used on his projects. Távora shared a multi-story studio with Siza afterwards for most of his life, until he passed away in September of 2005. Fernando Távora left a lifelong mark on Siza and his style ever since he was Siza’s teacher at the University of Porto till his death.<sup>15</sup>

There is a difference between nature and man-made, according to Siza. “What is made by men is not natural, more and more I think that there must be a certain distance between the natural and the man-made. But there must also be a dialog between the two.”<sup>16</sup> In many of Siza’s works, it can be seen that nature has been transformed, in a sense that he mimics the landscape with similar looks and frames sunlight to change the atmosphere inside and out. It is important to note that Siza tries to bridge the gap between nature’s beauty and what is man-made, while making sure it does not look forced.

Álvaro Siza, while staying contemporary, also blends together tradition with the architecture in his works. A striking difference that sets Siza apart from other high profile architects is that he usually stays in Europe for design work. Due to his own heritage, and the fact that most of his designs are located in Europe, Siza has become known for his clout in European architecture and is perhaps the most well-known living Portuguese architect.<sup>17</sup> Siza is able to respect the natural landscape and traditions of the locale he is working with since he grew up there, having first-hand experience that help him cater to someone’s needs. But while a majority of Siza’s projects are located in Europe, as explained before, his architecture has attracted the eyes of people abroad. In recent years, Siza has been commissioned to supervise projects and construct buildings in countries such as China, South Korea, and more recently the United States.<sup>18</sup> Siza is also able to respect the traditional architecture with his projects abroad.

Álvaro Siza also has acquired a long list of awards. Notable awards include the following: in 1982, Siza won the Prize of Architecture awarded by the Portuguese Department of the International Association of Art Critics; in 1992, Siza was awarded the Pritzker Prize given out by the Hyatt Foundation of Chicago for his design work; in 1996, he was given the SECIL Prize of Architecture.<sup>19</sup> There are many more exceptional awards that Siza has been bestowed, but the sheer size of the list can attest to the admiration of his lifetime of architecture.

Álvaro Siza’s skills on blending modernistic and traditional tastes, encasing emotion into physical space and connecting the outdoor world indoors are what sets him apart from other architects. I will look into Siza’s application of these three skills when discussing these selected works of his: the Boa Nova Tea House and Marés Ocean Swimming Pool in the town of Matosinhos, Portugal, the Pavilion for Portugal at the Expo ’98, and finally the Ribera-Serrallo Sports Complex in Cornella de Llobregat, Spain.

## Boa Nova Tea House

The Boa Nova Tea House was one of the first projects Siza worked on, and shows the architect using his newly acquired skills from the University of Porto. In 1958, in the last year Álvaro Siza was mentored by Fernando Távora, Siza was given the task to build the Boa Nova Tea House by Távora. Távora won an open competition held by the town of Matosinhos, near Siza’s birthplace in Porto, to redevelop the coastal district and passed on the tea house commission to Siza. Távora handpicked the spot along the Atlantic Ocean in the Leça da Palmeira coast for where the tea house was meant to be located, which was overrun with rock formations that the waves from the ocean crashed into, for its scenic views and height advantages. Siza, then twenty five years old, put the knowledge he gained from working with Távora to use and saw the project to completion in 1963.<sup>20</sup>

On the exterior, rock formations lead up to the tea house, where the waves of the Atlantic Ocean run up towards all hours of the day. A dining room atrium faces down to the Atlantic Ocean and lets diners enjoy the view of the rocks and coastline. According to legend, a large wave once flooded the tea house and washed the furnishings inside into the ocean. The furniture was recovered and refurbished, and reused in the rather unscathed tea house. The look is truly reminiscent of Frank Lloyd Wright, with wood paneling and white stucco walls that borrow from tradition and modernism.<sup>21</sup> This shows Siza coming to terms with his own style apart from mentor Fernando Távora’s modernist approach.

Building materials were the connecting factor in bringing two worlds, the interior and exterior, together. On the inside, wood paneling can also be found all across inside the tea house. From the wooden ceiling to the wooden floors to the wooden furniture, the interior contrasts with the environment outside, where no trees can be found nearby.<sup>22</sup> If one was standing inside, they would see the landscape completed with the wood paneling symbolizing the forest and the glass windows bringing in the sea both join in harmony. The glass windows in the dining room area scale from the ceiling down to the floor, and span from each of the concrete support pillars. The glass windows allow the connection of the outdoors and the view of the Atlantic Ocean, the rocks along the coast, and the sky and beyond, a trait Álvaro Siza was known for.

How did Siza blend the modernistic and traditional tastes at the time into the Bova Noa Tea House? The idea of a sea side restaurant is quite traditional to begin with, but Siza was able to put an updated spin on the idea. The wood paneling on the outside of the tea house sets out a visual boundary for the white stucco walls to end, meaning that both traditional and modernistic elements keep each other in check. The wood paneling on the inside is more reminiscent of a traditional dining room, and only shows modernist roots from the concrete pillars used to support the tea house. These elements of the construction brought together the otherwise two differing modernistic and traditional tastes.

The tea house Álvaro Siza created naturally encased emotion into its physical space and surroundings. The Atlantic ocean seen from the inside windows lets fellow diners in the tea house feel an emotion of relaxation, due to the calming nature of the sea. Additionally, Siza’s play on the lighting in the building from recessed skylights made sure the interior was always as lit as the exterior, making sure how people felt about the ambiance outside would carry over while they walked inside. The scenery and lighting play a huge roll on the emotions the tea house conveys.

Today, the Bova Noa Tea House has been renamed the Casa de Chá, but still retains the architecture scheme Álvaro Siza had designed. In 1991, Siza returned to the tea house, contracted for the restoration of the building from its wooden interior and furniture to the outside where the exterior had aged from the elements.<sup>23</sup>

## Marés Ocean Swimming Pool  

Another project commissioned for Álvaro Siza for the architecture firm he just established after graduating from the University of Porto was the Marés ocean swimming pool. Also known as the Leça ocean swimming pool, it was probably was the first of many projects to bring Siza fame. It was completed in 1966 and is located in Leça da Palmeira, Portugal, south of the Boa Nova Tea House that Siza constructed a few years prior. With most if not all of the public swimming pool constructed below ground level with the coastal road running alongside, the pool barely obstructs the natural view to the sea. It was created for beach goers who want to wade but also stay out of the actual Atlantic Ocean. Visitors walk down an inclined ramp from street level into the facility. From there, the square adults’ pool is elevated higher than the circular children’s pool in an effort to help better differentiate the two pool sections. The changing rooms, set behind a concrete supporting seawall and the pools to the east, are made out of contrasting dark wood. And these changing rooms are accessed below street level, leaving them hidden away from onlookers from the pools and pedestrians on the sidewalk by the road.24

Álvaro Siza made an effort to preserve the natural landscape with the large rock fragments created by the power of the ocean’s waves and incorporated them into the two pools. At first the plan was to build walls around the pools in order to deal with the rocks onsite. But instead, with two swimming pools onsite for adults and children, they both use concrete alongside the rock formations for the pools’ retaining walls.<sup>25</sup> Even though it sounds that there should be a clash between the modern man made concrete and Mother Nature and her rocks formations made from years of erosion from the ocean waves, there is not one. As written by New York Times’s Nicolai Ouroussoff, “The rough concrete walls fit so naturally into the context of the sea wall, the rocks and the ocean that they feel as though they’ve been there for centuries.”<sup>26</sup> A lesser mention is the probable reason to repurpose the rocks was to reduce the amount needed to be removed and allowed reduced construction cost. But even if so this shows Siza’s ability to achieve great design within the confines of budget and space.

It is no wonder Álvaro Siza was later contacted to design Avenida da Libredade, Leça da Palmeira’s coastal road that runs past by the public swimming pools, thirty-six years later in 2002. Siza and his design firm returned to the town to transform the generic road into a scenic one, reducing traffic, repaving of the street, and an update to the street’s nighttime lighting. In addition to the road for vehicles, Siza emphasized on non-vehicle traffic also: “A coastal road is not a picnic area. It is a place of movement: walking, running, skating, [and] riding on a tricycle or a bicycle. [It is] a place that is continually being made.” Being chosen to redevelop the coastal road thirty-six years after the completion of the Marés ocean swimming pool and the nearby Boa Nova Tea House reaffirmed the timelessness of Siza’s design principles themselves.<sup>27</sup>

How did Siza blend modernistic and traditional tastes into the swimming pool? One can see the modernist aspect of the swimming pool: concrete being the principal building material used in the project’s pool walls, seawall, and changing room space. There is also the traditional and contemporary architecture principles that stand out: repurposing the natural rock formations on the coast as parts of the pool and Álvaro Siza’s premise to keep the pool site hidden from the seascape when looking out to the Atlantic Ocean. This dual nature of Siza’s design illustrates his appreciation regarding the environment, and is what gives him critical acclaim from his critics. Both of these defining features helped relate the swimming pool to building tradition.

How did Álvaro Siza connect the otherwise two differing environments of the natural “outer” and artificial “inner” together in the Marés ocean swimming pool? The swimming pool itself used seawater from the Atlantic Ocean to fill itself, instead of freshwater. This allowed beach goers to enjoy the physical outside ocean while enjoying the qualities and protection of a contained pool. Furthermore, the concrete walls of the pool incorporated the rock formations, and created a basin for the pool. Once again, we can see Álvaro Siza’s ability to connect the natural and artificial worlds together, even if he partially took the idea quite literally.

The swimming pool Álvaro Siza created naturally encased emotion into its physical space and surroundings. People wading in the swimming pool are able to enjoy and savor the scenic views of the virtually never-ending Atlantic Ocean past the rocks on the coastline. This instilled an emotion of bliss brought in part by from the location Siza built the pool. Additionally, the location of the pool allowed swimmers to relish the sun as it sunsets on the ocean horizon while it casts shadows on the pool complex. The sunset and the natural phenomenon of light on the pool generates many pleasant emotions for swimmers to relax and appreciate, which a visit to the pool should do. The rocky backdrop and natural lighting play a huge roll on the emotions the swimming pool conveys.

## Pavilion for Portugal at the Expo ’98

Another showcase of Siza’s talents was at the International Exposition of 1998, branded and stylized as Expo ’98, which was held in Libson, Portugal.<sup>28</sup> Such a showcase of technological progress required a strong front of the design of the facilities that would hold the Portuguese exposition at the Expo ’98, since Portugal was the host country. At that point in time (it was 1994), Siza was already well renowned in Portugal’s architecture world. It was no wonder Álvaro Siza was commissioned to build Portugal’s showcase pavilion for visitors coming from countries from all across the globe. The building and pavilion Siza delivered in the end in 1998 is unique in each and every way.

The pavilion itself is a monolithic sight for visitors from the start of the expo. Álvaro Siza decided to place the pavilion near the main entrance of the expo, and anyone walking to other counties presences would have to pass by Portugal’s own presence first.<sup>29</sup> Portugal needed an alluring building to attract visitors, and it was for this reason Siza also decided to create a very different building than the ones located around it. Siza saw the multistory, towering buildings built for other counties in the exposition area as a chance to do the exact opposite. Built horizontally along the Tagus River, the pavilion was built horizontally instead of vertically, instead of the other nearby height challenging buildings.<sup>30</sup> Siza also moved the building closer to the water, in order to create a vertical depth from the water’s reflection of the building, without actually needing to create a skyscraper for such an effect.

Siza was dedicated to bringing the outdoors inward and opening the interiors. One of the main defining features of the pavilion is the downward arching concrete roof that covers the large outside space underneath it from the elements, supported only by steel ties attached to the ends of the roof and connected to the buildings aside it. This large open space, which Siza wanted to create a sense of wonder, hosted ceremonial functions for Portugal’s exposition showings. The pavilion’s roof looks as it defies the laws of physics, with such a long span of concrete floating three stories above the ground. The sunlight naturally frames the pavilion’s roof, side buildings, and brick walkways, and enhances the view of the Tagus River. The interiors are evenly lit from the windows spread out across the expanse of the pavilion. They were also built to be flexible, as the building would be later repurposed as the Expo ’98 came to a close. These plays on the natural elements of physics and light show Siza’s effort on connecting the worlds inside and out.

How did Siza blend modernistic and traditional tastes into the pavilion? Part of the concrete walls outside where the concrete roof hanged from were covered with red and green ceramic tiles, a traditional construction material with origins from Portugal.<sup>31</sup> These colorful tiles helped tie the building to Portugal’s heritage, as is expected for a building showcasing Portugal’s achievements to the world and for Siza. The tiles also helped diversity the otherwise bare three story concrete walls, which may have looked too cold and uninviting for expo visitors if not for the tiles. Around the building, three story tall squared columns surrounded the pavilion, like a contemporary version of the ornamental columns used in ancient Greek architecture. Both of these defining features helped relate the contemporary pavilion to tradition.

Siza also encased emotion into the physical space. The large spaces designed by Siza inside and out created a need of exploration, perfect for the expositions held inside the pavilion building. The intent of exploring the Expo may have led to greater satisfaction from fellow exposition goers. Additionally, the VIP rooms for VIP designed by Siza were placed on the upper floors and centered a courtyard away from the main entrance under the pavilion roof. These rooms felt secluded and away from the foot traffic of the Expo, even when large exterior windows bringing light into the rooms walled the rooms. This room layout established an emotion of serenity and calmness to VIP members who used the rooms, away from the buzz of the expo. Both of these elements realized the emotion hidden in Siza’s work.

## Ribera-Serrallo Sports Complex

One of Álvaro Siza’s more recently completed projects (2006), the Ribera-Serrallo Sports Complex is located in Cornella de Llobregat, Spain. Planning and construction started in 2003 and lasted three years. Compared to the Marés ocean swimming pool, the Ribera-Serrallo Sports Complex is much more elaborate and complex in design, as the complex contains a an indoor competitive swimming pool and an outdoor recreational pool, fitness rooms, restaurant, and basketball court. With nearly half a century since building the Marés ocean swimming pool, the knowledge and experience Siza has gained since then can be appreciated with the design of the sports complex.<sup>32</sup>

The indoor swimming pool is enclosed in an oblong elliptical space and has a slowly upward sloping ramp along the rim of the room for spectators to watch down from, similar to the ramp used in the Guggenheim Museum building in New York City that was designed by Frank Lloyd Wright, an architect Álvaro Siza respected. In the ceiling, there are sixty-two disc shaped skylights on its domed roof placed in a sixteen pointed star formation. When the sunlight shines down on the sports complex, these “silver discs”, as described by Carlos Castanheira, an architect who worked closely with Álvaro Siza, dance around the room’s floors, walls, and in the pool as the sun arcs over the day from sunrise to sunset. The movement of the spotlights create emotion from such a trivial element, a quality of Siza’s that cannot be easily imitated. Awarded the SECIL Prize in 2007 for this very reason by SECIL, a company that honors development in conjunction with the environment we live in, the prize “give[s] it the importance and attention it deserves.”<sup>33</sup> These skylights captures the world outside it beautifully and does so simply, and is what defines the room.

How did Siza blend the modernistic and traditional tastes at the time into the recently built Ribera-Serrallo Sports Complex? On the outside of the building grass was placed to the edge of the pool where usually lounging chairs and a concrete patio would be seen. And with the nontraditional, wavy shape of the outdoor pool, the entire scene is reminiscent of places traditionally built to take advantage of the views of a lake or pond. Additionally, trees were placed all around the sports complex, increasing the landscaping that originally was there. When paired with the white washed concrete walls found on the exterior, these elements of the construction brought together the otherwise two differing modernistic and traditional tastes.

How did Álvaro Siza connect the otherwise two differing environments inside and out together in the Ribera-Serrallo Sports Complex? In one case, Siza did so quite literally. Connecting the indoor swimming pool to the outside swimming pool is a large glass door that slides down to close, where swimmers inside can swim outside without the need to get out of the pool. This notion of interconnectivity of the external and internal elevates the pool into where casual swimmers can experience the allure of professional sport, as the standard swimming area for competition is shared with the area for leisure. And as just stated before, the dancing “silver discs” in the indoor pool area allows the sunlight from outside to make an incredible impression to swimmers. Once again, we can see Álvaro Siza’s ability to connect the outside and inside worlds together, even if he partially took the idea quite literally.

The sports complex Álvaro Siza created naturally encased emotion into its physical space and surroundings. In the inside of the complex, multistory tall corridors can be found leading to the competition swimming area and the basketball court. The corridors encase an emotion of suspense, which enhances the mood spectators feel when going to swimming tournaments and basketball games, which naturally instill a feeling of competition. But on the contrary, Siza’s play on the lighting in the building from the circular skylights made sure the interior always had a connection to the world beyond it, and brought relief to the corridors. The backdrop and lighting play a huge roll on the emotions the sports complex conveys.

# Conclusion

In closing, Álvaro Siza has influenced the architecture world with his ability to blend modernistic and traditional tastes, encase emotion into physical space and connect the outdoor world indoors. The selected projects discussed above are what I personally believe are the best to showcase his semi-modernistic and contemporary skillset. Siza’s fame is well established globally since he started his own private practice in the 1960s. As one of the few well-known architects hailing from Portugal, Siza is able to attain a balance between natures’ environment and man-made constructions, uniting these two differing principles into an exquisiteness that sometimes is difficult to express in words alone.

Modernism affected Álvaro Siza’s designs, and led him to use the design movement’s new standards and reformation of principles based on the technological advances of the twentieth century onward. Modernist design pushed forward from the principles established yesteryear and hand down as tradition called for. This era of transition resulted in experimentation with building designs and processes, such as Siza did in the Bova Noa Tea House and its combination of white stucco walls and wooden adornments. And International Style, the compilation of aesthetics that were common across the modern movements that were occurring around the globe, could be seen in Siza’s Pavilion for Portugal at the Expo ’98, where the downward swooping roof of the pavilion was untraditional and appeared as it defied the laws of physics. Today, modernism allows the ability for architecture to diverge from historical contexts and instead opt for a more modernist and symbolic design just as Siza had done, even if he personally does not identify as part of the modernist movement.

But while Álvaro Siza appreciated the tradition defying of modernistic architecture, he also valued timeless design. After researching and discussing the selected works of Siza, it became clear that they never completely fell into the category of Modernism. Instead an additional label of contemporary architecture felt as a better fit for Siza. More exceptional but as well as approachable, contemporary architecture has appeared to be the most preferred for Siza and other recent architects, like Frank Lloyd Wright. Siza admired renowned contemporary architect Wright, and we can see those organic architectural influences in Siza’s Bova Noa Tea House. Siza praised Wright’s ability to look beyond merely constructing places, and instead being able to thread each and every single element inside and out together with nature. The admiration of connection between the environment and structure resulted in Siza’s efforts to incorporate the environment into his projects, and as a result left a timeless mark on them.

Having grown up during political change in Portugal cumulating in the Carnation Revolution in April of 1974, Álvaro Siza and other architects like him wanted a fresh start for Portugal’s architectural future. The past reminded Siza of the political trauma, and tradition was placed on the backburner. Siza studied at the University of Porto in the School of Architecture and learnt from a blend of cultures from the past centuries of history that shaped Portugal’s traditional building style, as well as adopted modernist and contemporary principles that started to emerge as Siza grew up and matured. And Fernando Távora, Siza’s mentor, taught Siza all that he knew. A prominent difference that puts Siza apart from other high profile architects is that he typically does design work only in Europe, making him known for his sway in European architecture. Siza, due to his background and upbringing, is perhaps the most well-known living Portuguese architect.

As once again quoted from Siza’s architectural partner Carlos Castanheira, “These works will remain recent even when Siza comes to be one hundred years old… Such is timeless architecture. Such should be the architecture of our times.” <sup>34</sup> Álvaro Siza’s ability to stay timeless even when he began designing in the 1960s and nearing his eighties is one of the countless reasons I decided to look into his background and developments. Siza has influenced the architecture world with his ability to blend modernistic and traditional tastes, and I believe the ones he has chosen to work with will stay relevant for decades to come.

---

## Footnotes

1. Carlos Castanheira and Álvaro Siza, Álvaro Siza: The Function of Beauty (Phaidon Press, 2009), 7.
2. James Stevens Curl, “Modern Movement,” A Dictionary of Architecture and Landscape Architecture (Oxford University Press, 2006).
3. “International Style,” Encyclopedia Britannica, August 8, 2014.
4. Thomas Hamilton, “WORK COMPLETED ON U. N. BUILDINGS; $68,000,000 Plant Finished - Lie Announces a Plan to Reorganize Top Staff,” The New York Times, October 10, 1952.
5. Paul Goldberger, Building Up and Tearing Down: Reflections on the Age of Architecture (Monacelli Press, 2009), 44.
6. Paul Goldberger, “Modernism Reaffirms Its Power: ARCHITECTURE VIEW Modernism, Still Very Much Alive, Reaffirms Its Power,” New York Times, Late Edition (East Coast), November 24, 1985, sec. A.
7. Antonio Angelillo, Álvaro Siza: Writings on Architecture (Milan: Skira, 1998), 35.
8. Ibid., 42.
9. Brown Denise Scott, “Everyday,” Crucial Words Conditions for Contemporary Architecture, 2008, 73.
10. Angelillo, Alvaro Siza, 96.
11. The Hyatt Foundation, “Alvaro Siza 1992 Laureate,” The Pritzker Architecture Prize, accessed July 16, 2015, http://www.pritzkerprize.com/laureates/1992.
12. Giovanni Leoni, Álvaro Siza (Motta Architettura, 2009), 21.
13. Angelillo, Alvaro Siza, 54.
14. Brigitte Fleck, Alvaro Siza, English language edition (London: E & FN Spon, 1995), 23.
15. Leoni, Álvaro Siza, 22; Sonia Altmeppen and Philip Jodidio, Álvaro Siza, Revised edition (Köln: Taschen, 2003), 12.
16. Altmeppen and Jodidio, Álvaro Siza, 12.
17. Ibid., 6.
18. Nicolai Ouroussoff, “Modernist Master’s Deceptively Simple World,” The New York Times, August 5, 2007, sec. Arts / Art & Design.
19. Altmeppen and Jodidio, Álvaro Siza, 189.
20. Leoni, Álvaro Siza, 34; Altmeppen and Jodidio, Álvaro Siza, 12.
21. Fleck, Alvaro Siza, 24.
22. Luiz Trigueiros, Nuno Portas, and Paulo Varela Gomes, eds., Casa de Chá Da Boa Nova, Boa Nova Tea-House: Leça Da Palmeira, Portugal, 1958-1963 (Lisboa: Editorial Blau, 1992), sec. Boa Nova Tea–House 1991.
23. Altmeppen and Jodidio, Álvaro Siza, 12.
24. Trigueiros, Portas, and Gomes, Casa de Chá Da Boa Nova.
25. Angelillo, Alvaro Siza, 151.
26. Ouroussoff, “Modernist Master’s Deceptively Simple World.”
27. Castanheira and Siza, Álvaro Siza: The Function of Beauty, 150.
28. Leoni, Álvaro Siza, 66.
29. Ibid.
30. Altmeppen and Jodidio, Álvaro Siza, 143.
31. Ibid.
32. Castanheira and Siza, Álvaro Siza: The Function of Beauty, 230.
33. Ibid., 239.
34. Ibid., 7.

---

## Bibliography

- Altmeppen, Sonia, and Philip Jodidio. Álvaro Siza. Revised edition. Köln: Taschen, 2003.
- Angelillo, Antonio. Álvaro Siza: Writings on Architecture. Milan: Skira, 1998.
- Brown Denise Scott. “Everyday.” Crucial Words Conditions for Contemporary Architecture, 2008.
- Castanheira, Carlos, and Álvaro Siza. Álvaro Siza: The Function of Beauty. Phaidon Press, 2009.
- Curl, James Stevens. “Modern Movement.” A Dictionary of Architecture and Landscape Architecture. Oxford University Press, 2006.
- Fleck, Brigitte. Alvaro Siza. English language edition. London: E & FN Spon, 1995.
- Goldberger, Paul. Building Up and Tearing Down: Reflections on the Age of Architecture. Monacelli Press, 2009.
- ———. “Modernism Reaffirms Its Power: ARCHITECTURE VIEW Modernism, Still Very Much Alive, Reaffirms Its Power.” New York Times, Late Edition (East Coast). November <sup>24</sup>, 1985, sec. A.
- Hamilton, Thomas. “WORK COMPLETED ON U. N. BUILDINGS; $68,000,000 Plant Finished - Lie Announces a Plan to Reorganize Top Staff.” The New York Times, October 10, 1952.
- “International Style.” Encyclopedia Britannica, August 8, 2014.
- Leoni, Giovanni. Álvaro Siza. Motta Architettura, 2009.
- Ouroussoff, Nicolai. “Modernist Master’s Deceptively Simple World.” The New York Times, August 5, 2007, sec. Arts / Art & Design.
- The Hyatt Foundation. “Alvaro Siza 1992 Laureate.” The Pritzker Architecture Prize. Accessed July 16, 2015. http://www.pritzkerprize.com/laureates/1992.
- Trigueiros, Luiz, Nuno Portas, and Paulo Varela Gomes, eds. Casa de Chá Da Boa Nova, Boa Nova Tea-House: Leça Da Palmeira, Portugal, 1958-1963. Lisboa: Editorial Blau, 1992.
